OT Editor - Documentation (#340)
csesoc/website: backend/editor/OT/docs/operation_parsing.md

# Operation Parsing & Application

Surprisingly most of the complexity in the OT editor lives in the operation parsing and application logic. This document aims to help demystify some of it. As a quick aside, everything regarding operations can be found in the `operation` folder.

## The operation struct

> Operations (in Go) are defined as a struct, the operations we receive from the client conform to this structure and are parsed using a JSON parsing library (more on that later as there is a bit of complexity behind this). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operations (in Go) are defined as a struct. The operations we receive from the client conform to this structure and are parsed using a JSON parsing library (more on that later as there is a bit of complexity behind this). 
```

```go
type (

> 	// EditType is the underlying type of an edit
> 	EditType int
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

	// OperationModel defines an simple interface an operation must implement
	OperationModel interface {
		TransformAgainst(op OperationModel, applicationType EditType) (OperationModel, OperationModel)
		Apply(parentNode cmsjson.AstNode, applicationIndex int, applicationType EditType) (cmsjson.AstNode, error)
	}

	// Operation is the fundamental incoming type from the frontend
	Operation struct {
		Path                  []int
		OperationType         EditType
		AcknowledgedServerOps int

		IsNoOp    bool
		Operation OperationModel
	}

> )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
)
// EditType is an enum with `int` as the base type
type EditType int
const (
	Add EditType = iota
	Remove
)
```
Would be good to show what the values of `EditType` are :)

```
The above code snippet uniquely defines an operation. Operations take a path to where in the document AST they are being applied (see the paper on tree based transform functions) and the physical operation being applied. The operation being applied (`OperationModel`) is actually an interface and is the reason why parsing operations is more complex than it seems. This interface defines two functions, one for transforming a operation against another operation and one for applying an operation to an AST. 

> The reason why `OperationModel` is an interface is because there are several distinct types of operations we can apply for varying types. Theres different operations for editing an `integer`, `array`, `boolean`, `object` and `string` field. Each of these define their own transformation functions and application logic so in order to maintain a clean abstraction we use an interface. As an example this is how the `string` operation type implements this interface ![here](../operations/string_operation.go), its a rather intense implementation since it also implements string based transform functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason why `OperationModel` is an interface is because there are several distinct types of operations we can apply for varying types. Theres different operations for editing an `integer`, `array`, `boolean`, `object` and `string` field. Each of these define their own transformation functions and application logic, so in order to maintain a clean abstraction we use an interface. As an example this is how the `string` operation type implements this interface ![here](../operations/string_operation.go), its a rather intense implementation since it also implements string based transform functions.
```

## Operation application

> Recall that the `document_server` maintains an abstract syntax tree for the current JSON document, this AST is exactly what `cmsjson.AstNode` is, the document server maintains the **root node**. When applying an operation to a document we invoke the `Operation.ApplyTo` function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recall that the `document_server` maintains an abstract syntax tree for the current JSON document, this AST is implemented by `cmsjson.AstNode`, and the document server maintains the **root node**. When applying an operation to a document we invoke the `Operation.ApplyTo` function
```

# Operation Parsing & Application

Surprisingly most of the complexity in the OT editor lives in the operation parsing and application logic. This document aims to help demystify some of it. As a quick aside, everything regarding operations can be found in the `operation` folder.

## The operation struct
Operations (in Go) are defined as a struct. The operations we receive from the client conform to this structure and are parsed using a JSON parsing library (more on that later as there is a bit of complexity behind this). 
```go
type (
	// OperationModel defines an simple interface an operation must implement
	OperationModel interface {
		TransformAgainst(op OperationModel, applicationType EditType) (OperationModel, OperationModel)
		Apply(parentNode cmsjson.AstNode, applicationIndex int, applicationType EditType) (cmsjson.AstNode, error)
	}

	// Operation is the fundamental incoming type from the frontend
	Operation struct {
		Path                  []int
		OperationType         EditType
		AcknowledgedServerOps int

		IsNoOp    bool
		Operation OperationModel
	}
)
// EditType is an enum with `int` as the base type
type EditType int
const (
	Add EditType = iota
	Remove
)
```

> The above code snippet uniquely defines an operation. Operations take a path to where in the document AST they are being applied (see the paper on tree based transform functions) and the physical operation being applied. The operation being applied (`OperationModel`) is actually an interface and is the reason why parsing operations is more complex than it seems. This interface defines two functions, one for transforming a operation against another operation and one for applying an operation to an AST. 

Reviewer 2: would be nice to link the papers in the docs themselves, saves anyone reading having to click back and forth

> The reason why `OperationModel` is an interface is because there are several distinct types of operations we can apply for varying types. Theres different operations for editing an `integer`, `array`, `boolean`, `object` and `string` field. Each of these define their own transformation functions and application logic, so in order to maintain a clean abstraction we use an interface. As an example this is how the `string` operation type implements this interface ![here](../operations/string_operation.go), its a rather intense implementation since it also implements string based transform functions.

Reviewer 2: can get rid of the "it's a rather intense implementation" phrase

## Operation Parsing
So as pointed out earlier, parsing is rather tricky as our `Operation` struct contains an interface and the native JSON parsing lib in Go does not support interfaces. To get around this problem we wrote our own JSON unmarshaller based on the `goson` json parser, we call this unmarshaller `cmsjson`. 

The `cmsjson` library expects a full list of all types that implement an interface we wish to parse into, this list of types is defined ![here](../operations/json_config.go)
```go
var CmsJsonConf = cmsjson.Configuration{
	RegisteredTypes: map[reflect.Type]map[string]reflect.Type{
		/// ....

		// Type registrations for the OperationModel
		reflect.TypeOf((*OperationModel)(nil)).Elem(): {
			"integerOperation": reflect.TypeOf(IntegerOperation{}),
			"booleanOperation": reflect.TypeOf(BooleanOperation{}),
			"stringOperation":  reflect.TypeOf(StringOperation{}),

			"arrayOperation":  reflect.TypeOf(ArrayOperation{}),
			"objectOperation": reflect.TypeOf(ObjectOperation{}),
		},
	},
}
```

> the configuration is in essence a mapping between the the `reflect.Type` representation of the interface and the `reflect.type` representation of every struct that "implements it". Implements is in quote as there is no way to statically verify this at compile time, instead if any of these config options are invalid a runtime error will be thrown during parsing. Usage of the `cmsjson` library for the most part is rather simple (thanks to generics in Go :D). An example can be found in the `ParseOperation` function within `operation_model.go`.

Reviewer 2: can include a link to the code with the example
